Question 6: 

In his podcast "Development and Complexity," Owen Barder suggests a variety of ways that individuals can shape development. He compares rich and poor countries and attempts to find answers to explain the large disparities we see regarding development around the world. In his podcast, Barder touches on the idea of 'creative destruction,' an idea introduced by Shumpeter. He describes creative destruction as a means of firms and industries around the world changing and adapting to today's environment. The best way for firms and industries to increase their economic success, is to adjust and adapt their techniques and processes to be better suited for the current environment. This idea can be further explained by the company "Nokia." Nokia began as a company that sold rubber boots, but they soon moved to telecommunications in which they saw great success. However, Nokia never transitioned to smart phones which led to a large downfall in their economic success. They were overtaken by samsung and their success continued to decrease. This expands on the fact that since Nokia was unable to adapt to the current society, it was overtaken by samsung, which was introducing new ideas and technologies that worked well with the environment. 

Question 14:
Why does Barder recommend resiting engineering as a policy implication? What does he mean by isomorphic mimicry?

Barder introduces the idea of a 'Complex Adaptive System.' This system is one that is comprised of adaptive people, products, firms, and insitutions. It is all of these aspects working together that create a functioning society. Barder explains that it is almost impossible to engineer solutions in a complex adaptive system. He gives two main reasons for this, with the first one being that evolutionary processes often outperform design. He touches on a specific example including soap powder. There is a non-linear dynamic whcih makes it extremley difficult to predict exactly what will happen after an event. This is because institutions are always adapting and changing depending on what environment they are in. He also touches on the idea of 'isomorphic mimicry.' He explains the word using an example: when groups of individuals travel to a developing country in hopes of making a change with a mission statement, they usually make little to no process. This is because they are not aware of the changing environment in which they are trying to make a difference. The environment is always adapting and changing and although these individuals are attempting to make a change, they are unable to because of their lack of familiarity about the environment they are in. 
