Blumenstock Response

Sarena Oberoi

01/23/2020

 What is the promise of data science for human development? What are some of the pitfalls? 

Data science has the potential to solve many of the global problems we see in the world today. According to Blumenstock, it is possible to utilize some of the big data approaches used by companies such as Facebook, to help allocate resources to those living in poverty. By using a variety of methods including analyzing pictures taken by satellites of those living in unbearable conditions, it is possible to pinpoint exactly where resources should go. This way, those in serious need of help will be able to get the necessary assistance they need- faster and better. Furthermore, the use of phone data can allow us to track the negative effects of natural disasters and how different areas may be effected. This will allow us to directly help those that need it. 
Although, there is a large amount of groundbreaking research being done on the promises of data science, it is important to acknowledge the pitfalls that come with it. Blumenstock describes unanticipated events as one of the large pitfalls, explaining that big data benefits those that are already wealthy and well informed, instead of those that are in dire need of help. This lack of knowledge of many individuals around the world has led to poverty and debt in following years. Blumenstock also describes lack of validation as a large risk, in that although using new digital techniques can be less expensive than the original methods used, it is dangerous to generalize these findings, as they may not always be accurate. He explains that coupling the two methods together (old and new) will be the most effective. 
We have seen efforts in the past that had good intentions, but ultimately failed because of a lack of understanding regarding the effects of the efforts. It is important that along with good intentions, data scientists must be more thorough about their plans, and consider how their start-ups will work in the environment they are implemented in. Although the use of data science can aid in the number of humanitarian problems we see around the world today, it is important that the public has developed a clear understanding of what companies and researchers are doing with the data they have collected. Transparency is extremley important when it comes to dealing with data and individuals. For example, specifically when dealing with the distribution of loans, it is important that those receiving loans are cognizant of their financial status and certain that these loans will be beneficial to them, instead of leading to future debt. We must establish a balance in which the new applications created keep individuals in the loop at all times. The new applications that are created must take each individuals privacy into account. People should be able to entrust in the fact that their private information will be kept private and avoid being used in the wrong ways.    
