## Literature Review                                         
Sarena Oberoi 

April 6, 2020

### Introduction 
This research aims to investigate the use of a variety of geospatial data methods, including agent-based models, geographic information systems, and a gravity model in order to track and predict the spread of Ebola through Western Africa. Research has shown that Ebola is very easily spread, and mainly targets the organs, the immune system, and causes excessive bleeding **[1]**. Although scientists are researching various treatment plans and cures, the fatality rate is currently very high. During the early months of 2014, the virus was very prevalent in many countries around the world including parts of West Africa such as Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia, with each country observing a significant number of deaths due to the threatening virus **[2]**. This paper will touch on many different data science methods and compare the effectiveness and efficiency of each one. By using specific models and data such as the agent-based model, gravity model, call detail records (CDR's), it is possible to identify specific covariates that are the most critical in the spread of the Ebola virus. This paper will not only identify some of the most significant variables, but also discuss how they affect the spread of the virus altogether. With this knowledge regarding how the virus is spreading and which variables are increasing its spread, it is possible to diminish and eradicate the transmission of the virus overall, as well as prevent future Ebola Virus outbreaks. 
### Human Development Topic and Process
With the Ebola Virus targeting so many specific parts of the body (including white blood cells), the disease is extremely fatal with no guaranteed treatment. The virus is mainly transmitted through direct contact with a number of body fluids including the blood and vomit of an infected person. The main symptoms of the disease include excessive vomiting and bleeding, diarrhea, and rashes. If Ebola is diagnosed early on, the chance of survival is much higher. However, since the early symptoms of the virus are so similar to the symptoms of other common diseases, it is very difficult to diagnose Ebola in the early stages **[2]**. There have been studies done regarding an extremely effective vaccine used for the virus, but the vaccine was not introduced to many African countries until after the large outbreak. Although there is currently no single treatment for curing the Ebola virus, there are additional methods used to prevent the disease from being fatal. Some of these procedures include blood transfusions and drug therapies. Research has shown that one of the main transmission methods of Ebola is through direct contact with the meat of animals including bats and apes. It is extremely important that individuals refrain from contact with those individuals that are infected by the virus. By ensuring that individuals are thoroughly washing their hands, especially after coming in contact with someone infected, it will be easier to prevent the transmission of the disease **[2]**.
In his book "Develoment as Freedom," Amartya Sen expands on his definition of human development by touching on five main types of freedom: political freedom, social opportunities, protective security, economic facilities, and transparency guarantees. Sen describes the meaning and significance of social opportunities and how they are not only integral in increasing the well-being of an individual, but also critical in inceasing the opportunity to live happily, by allowing individuals to receive an education and have access to health care. With the Ebola virus being so prevalent, individuals were deprived of this right, which also directly resulted in a decrease in well-being and the opportunity to live a happy life. In terms of protective security, the governments in many countries took a number of preventative measures (such as travel bans) in order to contain the spread of the disease. Those living with the Ebola virus have limited opportunities and capabilities and are restricted from living the best life they can live. The sustainable development goal focused on healthy lives and well-being which was emphasized by attempting to increase life expectancy by eradicating the Ebola outbreak all together. 
Since the Ebola virus spreads at such a rapid rate, it is seen even more commonly in highly dense areas (e.g., urban areas). However, since the virus spreads through the contact of bodily fluids, it has been noted that those living in rural areas with very large families may be at a higher risk of contracting the virus **[7]**. Many of the countries that were affected with the large outbreak did not have advanced medical technologies, making the virus more transmissible. Furthermore, the virus reached its peak not long after a civil war which took over most of West Africa. The effects of the wars were detrimental, which left much of the infrastructure (such as hospitals) in shambles. These developing countries also had a lack of road networks that made it difficult to get those infected to the help they needed. Lastly, the number of doctors and health care workers was relatively low, as a number of individuals were uneducated **[1]**. Following the massive outbreak of Ebola cases in Western Africa, the government decided to take large preventive measures in order to prevent such a large tragedy from occurring again. A number of countries took matters into their own hands and issued a lockdown of their nation (as seen in Sierra Leone) as well as the quarantine of each household **[11]**. There was a dramatic decline in the economies of the countries affected. Trading and tourism were also greatly affected which directly resulted in a large regression of the economy. Many other countries worked to bring resources to the areas that were affected. The CDC began a number of disease response efforts including education regarding the virus, testing kits, doctors, etc. **[2]**. The world behaved as a complex adaptive system, in that many countries were cooperating with one another in order to help those in need. 
By using different techniques and measures such as call detail records (CDR's), geospatial data, and modeling the data using diverse models including agent-based models and gravity models, it is possible to not only know where the disease is spreading, but why it is spreading. 
### Geospatial Data Science Methods 
Agent based modeling is a common method that allows researchers to predict a variety of occurrences (such as disease outbreaks) by analyzing the relationship between agents (people or variables) and the environment. The use of agent based modeling has expanded to a variety of fields and continues to be used for a number of different research purposes. Not only does agent-based modeling analyze the relationship between agents and their environments, but it also looks into how agents can interact with the other agents incorporated into the model **[8]**. When creating this model it is important to classify the agents that will be used, how the agents will interact with one another, and how they will interact with the environment. **[8]**. A study done in Libera made use of an agent-based model by using DHS (demographic health survey) data obtained from a number of towns. The researchers looked into individuals (infected and uninfected with the virus) that were making trips to the hospital, funerals, or taking care of someone who was infected. The researchers randomly placed individuals in households based on the population distribution throughout the towns. The agent-based model worked to predict how the virus would spread based on factors such as the ability to obtain healthcare resources for the virus, as well as different burial methods used, or in other words, the process of funerals (it was shown that attending funderals and interacting with the deceased (who had the virus) was a driving factor in the spread of the virus). The model was able to accurately predict the percentage of people being infected, in that both the model and real data showed that those that spent time in hospitals in close proximity to those that already had the virus, were not only extremely at risk for contracting the virus, but also the lead reason for the spreading of the virus throughout the towns **[9]**. A very similar study was done in order to assess the spread of a disease in Ireland, which could also be beneficial for predicting the spread of Ebola. The agent based model used in Ireland, not only looked into the number of schools in the towns, population of each town, and number of individuals vaccinated, but also looked into the effects of the spread when preventative measures were taken **[10]**. By using a similar model, we can predict how Ebola would spread while different covariates are put into play. Another method that has proven to been quite useful is the gravity model. Gravity models have a variety of purposes, with one of the main ones being to determine how certain populations travel or move within an area. More specifically, there have been many epidemiological studies done using the gravity model in order to see how and where a specific disease or virus is spreading. In one study, a gravity model was used in order to track the spread of Ebola in a few countries in Western Africa, such as Sierra Leone and Liberia. There were a few central variables that were identified and focused on for most of the study. Some of these included individuals that were susceptible to the virus, recovered from the virus, and those that were deceased **[12]**. Similar to the agent based model which was discussed above, researchers involved in the gravity model also looked into funerals as well. The model was able to accurately predict how different regions and countries interacted with one another, which directly led to predicting where the virus was spreading. The gravity model suggested that taking preventative measures in Liberia would not only decrease the spread of the virus in Liberia alone, but also diminish the spread of the virus through all of Western Africa **[12]**. The gravity model and the agent-based model described above were both very beneficial in both predicting where the virus would go, as well as which preventative measures were the most effective. Lastly, there was significant research done on the use of geographic information system mapping (GIS). A geographic information system works to analyze spatial and geospatial data collected from a variety of locations **[13]**. The first step in creating a geographic information system (GIS) is to collect data regarding road networks, important locations (hospitals and health care centers), topography, etc. from a wide range of sources, including Google Maps and OpenStreetMap [14]. Furthermore, looking into publicly available data such as data collected from the UN, can be helpful in getting specific information regarding the specific area of interest. When identifying the population, it is beneficial to look into census data, in order to get a general idea of how the population is distributed throughout a specific area. Specifically with the spread of Ebola, researchers were able to combine the use of GPS data with survey data to get a more accurate representation of where the virus was spreading. With GPS data, researchers took note of the longitude and latitude of each household in a town, and compared it with other households in the area in order to see which factors were most critical in the spread of Ebola **[13]**. These methods were also combined with the use of CDR (call detail records), in order to analyze where individuals within a population were moving. The CDR data gave very accurate information about individuals and information in regards to their movement (exact time and location they were moving) **[2]**.
There was a study done in order to identify some of the main risks of Ebola transmission by focusing on individual households in Western Africa. The first step was identifying the households that had at least one member show symptoms of the Ebola virus. Surveys were conducted in order to identify the number of individuals living in each household, as well as other information such as the age of each member in the household, how many rooms and bathrooms, and collecting information regarding quarantine status. Google maps was used in order to identify the exact location and longitude and latitude of each house **[13]**. A geographic information system was used in order to classify how far households were from one another, as well as how far they were from a hospital/health care facilities. The models showed that the number of individuals living in households, as well as the amount of time passing from the start of the outbreak (of the Ebola virus) were the two main risk factors in the spread of the virus through villages. Researchers noted that geocoding could play an important role in decreasing the spread, as it is vital to look into households that are located in isolated locations to ensure that individuals located in these remote areas are getting the proper disease control resources needed in order to not only help those that are already suffering from the virus, but also prevent the virus from spreading even more rapidly **[13]**. As noted from the other geospatial datasets described, multiple methods were used in tandem with one another in order to produce the most accurate results. By using CDR data alongside GIS, the gravity model, and an agent based model, researchers were able to pinpoint some of the most significant factors identified for the spread of the disease.     
### Discussion
Based on the previous research done, the use of these geospatial datasets has been very beneficial in seeing which covariates are the most critical in the spread of the Ebola virus. Furthermore, according to the research I have done so far, it is evident that there are a variety of different methods that researchers have been using that not only provide significant evidence for how Ebola spreads, but how many diseases prevalent in today’s world spread as well. For example, along with CDR data and gravity models, researchers have made use of the random forest model in order to predict where a variety of diseases will go. Looking at the data I have looked into, I have noticed that although researchers do look into different covariates, it seems that covariates they are choosing to research are very narrow. I've noticed that a large gap that I have found in the research, is that scientists are failing to recognize how a number of different covariates in tandem with one another) are effecting the spread of the disease. For example, in the articles that I have read it seems that most researchers look into specific aspects such as the number of individuals in the household, the number of bathrooms, how far households are from hospitals. Although these variables are extremely important to research, I feel that it is also important to interview individuals in order to gain insight regarding their own medical health. This could include gathering information regarding previous, as well as current health conditions. This way, it is possible to see who is most at risk of contracting the virus. Furthermore, gathering data on the sanitary habits of individuals living in Western Africa (or other countries that are at risk for the virus) could be very beneficial in identifying individuals that are more at risk for the Ebola virus. This focus on hygiene could also be beneficial in seeing how sanitary and hygienic habits effect the spread of the virus. I believe that the overall questions that I am attempting to answer is “what are the main factors that are most critical in the spread of the Ebola virus?” By identifying these central factors, researchers know exactly which elements they should track and keep a close eye on. By focusing on these factors, it is possible to track the spread of Ebola, and ultimately, eradicate the outbreak overall. 
### Bibliography
**1. “2014-2016 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 8 Mar. 2019, www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/history/2014-2016-outbreak/index.html.**

**2.	Ebola Virus Disease Distribution Map: Cases of Ebola Virus Disease in Africa Since 1976. (2019, June 19). Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/history/distribution-map.html**

**3.	Peak, C. M., Wesolowski, A., Erbach-Schoenberg, E. Z., Tatem, A. J., Wetter, E., Lu, X., Bengtsson, L. (2018). Population mobility reductions associated with travel restrictions during the Ebola epidemic in Sierra Leone: use of mobile phone data. International Journal of Epidemiology, 47(5), 1562–1570. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyy095**

**4.	Zinszer, K., Morrison, K., Verma, A., & Brownstein, J. S. (2017). Spatial Determinants of Ebola Virus Disease Risk for the West African Epidemic. PLoS Currents. doi: 10.1371/currents.outbreaks.b494f2c6a396c72ec24cb4142765bb95**

**5.	Jain, A. (2017). Predictive Models for Ebola Using Machine Learning Algorithm (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from http://fau.digital.flvc.org/islandora/object/fau%3A38026/datastream/OBJ/view/Predictive_Models_for_Ebola_using_Machine_Learning_Algorithms.pdf**

**6.	Fiorillo, G., Bocchini, P., & Buceta, J. (2018). A Predictive Spatial Distribution Framework for Filovirus-Infected Bats. Scientific Reports, 8(1). doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-26074-4**

**7.	Misra, Tanvi, and Tanvi Misra. “Does Ebola Spread Faster in Cities?” CityLab, 3 Oct. 2014, www.citylab.com/life/2014/10/does-ebola-spread-faster-in-cities/381115/.**

**8.	Venkatramanan, Srinivasan, et al. “Using Data-Driven Agent-Based Models for Forecasting Emerging Infectious Diseases.” Epidemics, Elsevier, 22 Feb. 2017, www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1755436517300221.**

**9.	Merler, Stefano, et al. “Spatiotemporal Spread of the 2014 Outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease in Liberia and the Effectiveness of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions: a Computational Modelling Analysis.” The Lancet. Infectious Diseases, U.S. National Library of Medicine, Feb. 2015, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25575618.**

**10.	Gleason, B. L., et al. “Geospatial Analysis of Household Spread of Ebola Virus in a Quarantined Village – Sierra Leone, 2014: Epidemiology & Infection.” Cambridge Core, Cambridge University Press, 22 Aug. 2017, www.cambridge.org/core/journals/epidemiology-and-infection/article/geospatial-analysis-of-household-spread-of-ebola-virus-in-a-quarantined-village-sierra-leone-2014/FF334CAB5CAEBA1AE7ACE3265B221934.**

**11.	D'Silva, Jeremy P, and Marisa C Eisenberg. “Modeling Spatial Invasion of Ebola in West Africa.” Journal of Theoretical Biology, U.S. National Library of Medicine, 7 Sept. 2017, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5576591/.**

**12.	“Geographic Information System Data.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 13 Dec. 2018, www.cdc.gov/eis/field-epi-manual/chapters/GIS-data.html.**

**13.	Admin. “What Is GIS – Definition?” Grind GIS-GIS and Remote Sensing Blogs, Articles, Tutorials, 26 Nov. 2017, grindgis.com/what-is-gis/what-is-gis-definition.**






