In the paper "Disaggregating Census Data for Population Mapping Using Random Forests with Remotely-Sensed and Ancillary Data," Steven's, among other authors, describes the use of the "Random Forest" technique to estimate population distributions around the world. The Random Forest technique works by placing multiple 'trees' in different locations in order to make predictions regarding the human distribution and population in a variety of locations.  

In short, a machine learning algorithim is a set of a variety of procedures that are able to modify themselves and adapt, depending on the program. For example, a random forest model is a good example of a machine learning algorithim because it is able to modify itself based on the predictions the trees give. The reading explained that previously, gridded population sets were used, and although they were helpful, they were not always accessible in developin countries. With these however, high resolution imagery is needed and this is not always attainable. With the random forrest, we are able to incorporate geospatial data from multiple scales and incorporate it into a daysymetric model. 

The researchers in this study looked into a number of different covariates, including urban areas, rural settlements, distance to roads, water bodies, health clinics and hospitals, ect. Depending on the specific covariates, we can assume where populations will be greater. Furthermore, these machine learning methods are extremley important, as they help understand how the population is distributed in many locations around the world and with this informaiton we can understand where resources should go in the case of a natural disaster or something of a similar nature. 

Using machine learning, it is possible to track the spread of Ebola. Many studies have used the random forest model to track how ebola is spreading, as well has how many cases are seen in specific parts of the world. By using similar models, it is possible to see how prevalent ebola is in certain parts of the world, based on a number of covariates such as land type and terrain. 
