##### In Anderson's 2008 Wired article he describes how the data deluge is serving to make the scientific theory obsolete. Kitchen provides a rebuttal to Anderson's argument that theory is dead with his supposition that in fact we have entered a fourth paradign. What do you think? Do you beleive theory is dead? Do you think we have indeed entered a paradigm shifting revolution for how we describe, analyze and understand the world?

Anderson begins his article by underscoring the significant advancement of big data. He gives a brief description regarding the evolution of big data: from computers, to the internet, to databased, and finally to the present day: the petabyte age. He further explains that although the scientific method was crucial for models and experiments years ago, its value is beginning to diminish, as scientists and reasearchers have begun to rely on big data to replace the scientific method. Instead of beginning with a theory and then going about creating a model, scientists are more focused on 'data driven research.' Contrasting to Anderson's argument, Kitchen elaborates on a 'fourth paradigm,' which Gray describe as a combination between data-intensive research and the scientific method. He explains that it creates a 'new era of empiricism,' in which even more questions can arise through looking into large amounts of data. I agree with Kitchens argument, in that this idea of 'data driven research' creates new theories and ideas that can also be researched. Using data to guide research allows more questions to arise. However, with this data-driven approach, there can be a great deal of bias. This is because the data collected must be interpreted and each person analyzing it may be interpreting it differently. 
